+++
title = "RC 2022 Day 21 - Haskell types"
date = 2022-09-06
+++

Today I was reviewing the difference between types and typeclasses in Haskell.

## The `data` keyword
The data keyword makes a new type.  

This could be like a struct, with multiple named fields:
```haskell
data Card = Card  { suit :: Suit,
                    value :: Value }
                  deriving (Eq, Show)
```

It could have one field:
```haskell
data Thing a = This a | That a deriving Show
```

Or it might not have any fields (like an enum):
```haskell
data Suit = Clubs | Diamonds | Hearts | Spades
            deriving (Eq, Show)

data Value = Ace | Two | Three | Four | Five | Six | Seven | Eight | Nine | Ten | Jack | Queen | King
             deriving (Eq, Ord, Show)
```


## The `type` keyword

The type keyword makes a type synonym: it let's you give an existing type a new name:
```haskell
type Deck = [Card]
```
This is cheaper than making a new type, as the compiler doesn't have to make a new type - it just let's you call an old one by a new name.


## The `class` keyword
The class keyword makes a new typeclass.  Typeclasses describe *behaviour* in Haskell.

Eq, Ord, Show are all type classes:

- Members of Eq can be compared with the == function

- Members of Ord can be compared with <,>,>=, etc

- Members of show can be rendered (show converts to a string, which can then be printed)


In the examples above we can 'derive' Eq and Show because the compiler can check if the values are the same and convert them to a string.  With the Value type we also derived Ord - the compiler orders them in the order they are declared.

Typeclasses are like interfaces in object oriented programming.  They contain function declarations that must be implemented to conform to the interface.

To implement Ord we can just implement compare and the compiler can deduce the other functions needed.  Here's an example:

```haskell
data Play = Rock | Paper | Scissors
            deriving (Show, Eq)

instance Ord Play where
    compare Paper Rock = GT
    compare Rock Scissors = GT
    compare Scissors Paper = GT
    compare _ _ = LT
```
